## This is the **build** documentation file.

# Table of Contents:

[Introduction](#Introduction)

[Downloading Repository](#Downloading-Repository)

[Pre-Compiling](#Pre-Compiling)

[Generating the Bitstream](#Generating-the-Bitstream)

[Programming the FPGA](#Programming-the-FPGA)


## Introduction

Thanks for justburn for his contributions on getting this file started!

The overall process from go-to-whoa takes about 90 minutes.

Basically you:

1. download the repository from github (5 mins),
1. make the nessessary pre-compiling (5 mins)
1. use Xilinx ISE to compile the design into a bitstream (60 mins)
1. copy bitstream onto fpga board

Detailed instructions are below.

## Downloading Repository

The following is assumed:

1. you have linux, say, Ubuntu 15
1. you have git installed
```bash
$> sudo apt-get install git
```

Make a working directory for your project, we refer to that working directory as ```$GIT_ROOT```
```
$> cd $GIT_ROOT
```
Clone the following two git repositories into your working directory
```
$GIT_ROOT$> git clone https://github.com/Ben-401/c65gs.git
$GIT_ROOT$> 
$GIT_ROOT$> git clone https://github.com/gardners/Ophis.git
$GIT_ROOT$> 
```
You should now have two directories in your working directory, ie ```c65gs``` and ```Ophis```.

Change directory into the ```c65gs``` working directory.
```
$GIT_ROOT$> cd c65gs
$GIT_ROOT$/c65gs>
```

The current branch that we support is the ```dockit``` branch, so update your files to reflect this branch:
``` 
$GIT_ROOT$/c65gs> git checkout dockit
```
To make sure that you have the latest files, all you have to type is:
``` 
$GIT_ROOT$/c65gs> git pull
```
You are now ready to pre-compile some files.

## Pre-Compiling

The following is assumed:

1. you have ```gcc``` installed (i have ver 5.2.1) (for compiling c.*)
1. you have ```make``` installed (i have 4.0) (for the makefile)
1. you have ```python``` installed (I have ver 2.7.10) (for some scripts ???)
1. you have ```libpng12-dev``` installed (for the image manipulation)

In your working directory: type the following
```
$GIT_ROOT$/c65gs> ./compile.sh
$GIT_ROOT$/c65gs> 
```
The ```compile.sh``` script calls the ```make``` command in the ```./precomp``` directory, then issues commands to build the design using ISE commands.

NOTE that currently you will need to open the design in ISE and implement the design. This only needs to be done once initially so that some files become created. Once these files are created the ```compile.sh``` script should make use of the files generated by ISE.

At some stage I need to resolve while files are causing the ISE build script to fail, and maybe put those files into git.

The following warnings may appear, but these are OK:
```
WARNING: branch out of range, replacing with 16-bit relative branch
```
All pre-compiling (for the minimal build) should now be done.

## Generating the Bitstream

The following is assumed:

1. you have Xilinx ISE 14.7 WebPACK installed, with a valid licence

Open ISE and ```Project -> Open``` and choose the ```"mega65"``` project.

You should be able to double-click on the ```"Generate Programming File"``` and a bit-stream should be created.

## Programming the FPGA

We Load the bitstream into the Nexys 4 DDR board via USB stick:

1. you need a USB stick formatted as FAT32
1. copy the bitstream to the root directory of the USB stick
```
$GIT_ROOT$/c65gs> cp container.bit /media/sdc1
```

1. power OFF nexys board
1. place USB stick into the USB_HOST header
1. set jumper JP2 to USB
1. set jumper MODE to USB/SD
1. power ON nexys

Upon powerup, the bitstream is copied from USB into FPGA, then the FPGA executes it.

The End.
